well uh given the auspices under which
this meeting is being held I expect that
most people in this room are in favor of
progress
and more than that I
um I expect that
the aspiration to Rapid and unbounded
progress does not evoke in most of you
the
nameless dread
and even anger and sometimes willful
irrationality that it does evoke in some
circles and therefore
I don't have to persuade you that for
instance
life is better than death
and I don't have to explain exactly why
knowledge is a good thing
and that the alleviation of suffering is
good and communication and travel and
space exploration and ever faster
computers and
excellence in Art and Design
um all good human
flourishing is good and
also contrary to the weight of
conventional wisdom
it is not possible to have too much
good
Okay so
progress in all of these fields is
related by
the fact that it all depends on progress
in science and in technology
but also for sustained progress over
long periods one also needs
the rational
decision-making institutions of an open
Society and also certain values such as
tolerance and respect for the truth
and
rationality
optimism which I will come to
um I explained also that most of us here
share that that aspiration to progress
in our individual lives and that we also
share those values so that we expect
the means of making progress to be
a reason and and science
uh apply to solved problems
and
that it requires modes of thought
therefore from which irrationality is
completely excluded so I want to start
with those assumptions
and to explain what I think reason
entails in regard to the unknowable
Future
the uh the outgoing president of the
Royal Society Martin Reese whom I have
described as
the finest all-round physicist of the
day
wrote a book at the turn of the
Millennium called some of you may have
read it it's called
um our final century
meaning the 21st century
um in America it was called our final
hour
with with the subtract
a scientist's warning how Terror error
and environmental disaster threatened
humankind's future in this century
on Earth and Beyond
so
Rhys wrote in that book that the
probability of civilization surviving
the 21st century is about one half
he didn't argue for the exact number but
he wanted to stress that it was a lot
less than one and therefore merits
serious effects on policy
presumably
with a view to increasing that
probability
um but I'm not sure whether he he
doesn't say whether he included in his
estimate
the probability that his book would
actually achieve that effect by
persuading people
see this there's already something
paradoxical about the very concept of
probabilistic prediction in in regards
to this problem
and that Paradox is called the Cassandra
paradox
anyway
um his argument is that we are living at
a unique moment in history at the moment
when
the range of technology is is having
effects and causing risks and dangers on
the scale of the planet as a whole
and civilization as a whole and our
species
and so he he lists lots of uh
existential risks or some of them near
existential
both from unintended consequences of
progress such as
The Escape of uh genetically engineered
organisms from a laboratory which then
go on to cause a pandemic of an
incurable disease
but also
um
malevolently intended side effects of
progress like terrorists using that kind
of weapon or other weapons of mass
destruction
is also worried about and I think some
of you are too
about
intelligent robots AIS going rogue
and he says that nanotechnology is could
be even more threatening
um
that's a selection of the risks he talks
about
um he points out that for his for this
prophecy of Doom to hold
that is prophecy of Doom at the 50
confidence level to hold
um it's not necessary for any one of
these potential risks to be at all
likely
because we need only be unlucky once
and we incur the risk afresh every time
there is progress in a variety of fields
and Greece Compares this with playing
Russian roulette
except that if you were right it would
actually be worse than Russian Roulette
because
with our accelerating rate of progress
we are pulling this metaphorical trigger
more and more rapidly more and more
often
and we're also loading more and more
bullets into previously empty
metaphorical Chambers
um okay well
there are several mistakes there
um which I don't have time to go into
but one mistake in particular is quite
profound and very widespread and is
relevant to what I want to say
today
comparing The Human Condition with
Russian Roulette
is a very false analogy
because
the probability of winning or losing at
Russian Roulette is unaffected by
anything that the player may think or do
provided that the rules are obeyed
it is a game of pure chance
but the future of civilization
depends entirely on what we think and do
if civilization fails there won't be
something that just happens to us it'll
be the consequence of choices that
people have made
and if civilization survives then that
will be because people have succeeded in
solving the problems of survival
and that too will not have happened by
chance
the P the reason that people confuse
these two kinds of unpredictability is
that
um
well these two kinds of of uh
unknowability is is that
civilization and Russian Roulette are
both are both unpredictable but for
unrelated reasons Russian Roulette is
just random and we can't predict the
specific output but we know what all the
outcomes are and what their
probabilities are if the rules are
obeyed and therefore if we were forced
into some horrible choice between
different kinds of games of Russian
black with different numbers of bullets
and Chambers and so on we could simply
use Game Theory
to work out what the best choice was
and we do that perfectly mechanically
um just as if the game were
deterministic the fact that it is random
has no effect whatever on how accurately
we can compute
what the right decision is
um
but in the case of of civilization the
reason that
trying to work out the trying to
foretell the future of civilization is
unpredictable
is that the knowledge that is going to
determine
not only the outcome but all the steps
towards the outcome and
um
what outcomes are even possible and as
well as what their probabilities are
that knowledge has yet to be created we
don't know it so we can't use it and
that would be true
no matter how deterministic it the the
process was even if we were
in a simulation running on a
deterministic computer and so that that
unknowability would still be perfectly
true and the future will still be
perfectly opaque to us in that respect
this makes all the difference
in Game Theory
which is also called decision Theory but
I'm going to argue that it's not
actually applicable to decisions of a
type that I'm discussing
one assigns a probability and a utility
to every possible outcome of every
possible option that one has and then
one chooses the option with the highest
expectation of the utility
but where one is ignorant of the
possible outcomes and of all the
possible intermediate steps leading to
them and all the options that will be
available to the player at all those
intermediate steps then it's simply
impossible to imp to apply that decision
theoretic method or model of making
choices and there is no fudge to get
around this
the very use of the concept of
probability in this concept in this
context is invalid
is unknowable in this strong sense but
it's a fact that is almost universally
underestimated
that's partly because
it's like a blind spot just just as our
brains
um fill in the image of our eyes to
disguise from us the fact that our eyes
have blind spots so it's hard to take
the extent
of our future blindness seriously when
we try to imagine
the future of knowledge
our brains simply fill in an imaginary
future
necessarily differs from the real thing
in decisive ways
so just to bring home this point I want
to illustrate this with a thought
experiment that's set in the past where
we can use hindsight as a substitute for
and Imagining the unimaginable
okay so suppose that someone in the year
was trying to
make plans for the 20th century and try
to use the best knowledge existing then
to predict
the factors
that would either threaten civilization
or be necessary for the further progress
of civilization
they couldn't
possibly have guessed
that some of the biggest threats and
also some of the biggest opportunities
would come from the properties of the
element Uranium
and from its transmutation into
plutonium and into other elements
over heavy isotopes of hydrogen they
couldn't have guessed any of that
because radioactivity had only just been
discovered that almost nothing was known
about it transmutation was still a
standard example of a Superstition that
Alchemists used to believe in which
chemist chemistry has now science of
chemistry has now discovered to be
impossible
even though Rutherford and Saudi
actually demonstrated in 1901 but we're
talking about the 1900s
Isotopes weren't discovered until 1913
and plutonium wasn't discovered until
1940.
and it's not just Nuclear Physics other
entire Fields such as Aeronautics and
computer science and biotechnology
shaped the 20th century
and just as no one in 1900 could have
foretold the content of those fields in
in many cases because they couldn't have
foretold the existence of those fields
so our own future will be shaped much
more than that by knowledge that we do
not forget to have we can't predict
even the problems that we'll encounter
let alone the solutions and the
attempted Solutions and the failures and
the consequences of all that happening
people in 1900
didn't consider nuclear power or the
internet
unlikely
they just didn't conceive of them at all
okay well that was a thought experiment
but
more or less the actual experiment was
done in 1894. I'm Albert Michelson of
the Nobel Prize being physicist of the
Marcus and Morley experiment attempted a
prophecy
that
required the same kind of form knowledge
as the one that Reese attempted except
that Michelson was was trying it for a
much simpler sub-problem that of
prophesying just the future of
theoretical physics
and his conclusion was as follows I will
read it
the most important fundamental laws and
facts of physical science have all been
discovered and these are now so firmly
established that the possibility of
there ever being supplanted in
consequence of new discoveries is
exceedingly remote
our future discoveries must be looked
for in the sixth place of decimals
okay well spectacularly wrong
um but we have to think
Michaelson wasn't stupid you know um
what exactly was he doing when he judged
that there was only a quote exceedingly
remote chance
probability that the foundations of
physics as he knew them would ever be
superseded well
he was drawing conclusions from the best
available knowledge
but that best available knowledge was
none other than the physics of 1894.
it just isn't the case that he worked
out that relativity probably wouldn't be
invented 11 years later
and that quantum theory was probably
false
that the Universe probably wasn't
expanding and the Big Bang probably
didn't happen and so on for almost the
whole of what we now consider
fundamental physics and chemistry
he just didn't conceive of any of those
possible outcomes at all
and a century earlier
LaGrange
mathematician and physicist had made
exactly the same mistake he remarked
that
Isaac Newton was not only the greatest
genius that ever lived but also
the luckiest
because quote the system of the world
can be discovered only once
lagrange's own
way for the replacement of Newton's
system of the world and so did
Michaelson's
isn't that ironic
Okay the reason for all this is that no
explanation however powerful
can possibly predict the content of its
own successes
and therefore nor can science predict
any phenomenon whose course is going to
be affected by the growth of knowledge
by the creation of new ideas because not
just knowledge it also is Saints
this is
a fundamental limitation on the reach of
scientific explanation
and prediction
and when planning for the future it is
vital to come to terms with this
so okay from now on like I'm going to
follow Carl popper and I'll use the term
prediction for
conclusions about future events that
follow from good explanations and I'll
use the term prophecy
for anything that purports to know what
is not yet knowable
trying to know the unknowable leads
inevitably to
error and and self-deception
in particular a prophecy
always it always has one of two
structures it's it's either it's either
consists of whistling in the dark saying
something like um you're going to meet a
told our stranger and live happily ever
after
from existing knowledge
then it's
going to be biased towards bad outcomes
and the basic reason for that is that as
said the growth of knowledge is good
and so that kind of Prophecy which can't
imagine it is going to be biased against
prophesying good
a famous example is that in 1798
Thomas Malthus argued that the 19th
century was going to see a permanent end
to human progress
he calculated that the exponentially
growing population at the time which is
a consequence of various kinds of
progress
was about to exceed the planet's
capacity for producing food
and and that this was not an accidental
Misfortune he he believed that he
discovered a law of nature
because as he argued on the one hand
the net increase in population in every
generation is proportional to the
existing population and therefore
population increases exponentially but
on the other hand when food production
increases
for instance when
previously uncultivated land is brought
into cultivation
then that that increase in food
production is not proportional to the
existing population
and so it must be overtaken by the
exponential increase and it must be
overtaken sooner rather than later
so the mouth has concluded that he was
living at a uniquely dangerous moment in
history
remember that that that's an idea that's
been quite a common feature of
pessimistic philosophies over the
centuries
now in the end
any event
throughout the 19th century the
population exploded just as Malthus had
predicted
yet
the end to progress that he had
prophesied did not happen quite the
contrary
and that was in part because
food production increased even faster
than the population and then during the
20th century
both those increases continued even more
with
food production again winning
now do you see what happened there
mouth is quite
accurately foretold one phenomenon the
the population explosion but he entirely
missed the other phenomena the the
explosion in food production
why because
in 1798 the forthcoming increase in in
population was much more predictable
than the even larger increase in food
supply not because it was in any sense
more probable
but simply because it depended Less on
the creation of knowledge
By ignoring that structural difference
between these two phenomena that he was
trying to compare
He Slipped from educated guesswork into
blind prophecy he thought that he was
making predictions
from the best knowledge available
but in reality
he was just allowing himself to be
misled by the ineluctable and
permanent fact of the human condition
that we do not know that which we have
not yet discovered
so okay given some of the determinants
of the future events and more and more
of them are going to be beyond the reach
of scientific prediction
what is
the rational approach to the unknowable
well okay we have to start by unwinding
all those false assumptions about
estimating probabilities and playing
games and and knowing the unknowable and
we have to return to the basics with
which I began here
reason and science
are the means to progress but they are
not means to prophecy
uh I I must just point out one more
thing to set the context
the Russian Roulette argument
would be valid if there were no progress
or if progress were very slow because
well several reasons one is that
existing technology contains dangers as
well and civilizations have been
destroyed before
with primitive technology
and merely pulling the trigger less
often
doesn't change the the inevitability of
Doom and not all potential catastrophes
are side effects of progress at all
for a given catastrophe just imagine
something like a pandemic or an imminent
Comet strike but unforeseen
how much harm it does
depends on how rapidly knowledge can be
brought to bear
while it's happening and afterwards
therefore
one of the most important uses of
technology is to counteract disasters
and to recover from disasters
both from
foreseen and unforeseen evil so
therefore
the speed of progress it's not just the
speed of the faster progress brings us
good stuff faster it's the speed of
progress itself is one of the things
that
is a defense against catastrophe
and note also that in regard to
intentionally caused evils it is perhaps
the main defense
the speed of progress is the thing that
gives one of the things that gives the
good guys The Edge over the bad guys
because
good guys make faster progress
and the more progress slows down the
More Level the playing
length is their weapons and their moment
to do harm
so rapid continuing progress
is indeed desirable
and so the question is only
is it possible
so I'll begin with with the most
fundamental kind of knowledge of
universal laws both scientific and
philosophical now
that kind of knowledge consists of
explanation and assertions about reality
and how reality works
is that kind of knowledge
bounded
and I suppose we have to ask first
are there these universal laws and and
if if there are
um are they knowable
is the world explicable because again if
there's a bound on the explicability of
nature on the amount
discovered for whatever reason
I mean significant knowledge that
affects what we ought to plan for
then prophecy is only impossible until
we hit that bound after that it would be
Russian Roulette from then on
so what sort of is such a bound did
exist what sort of bound could it be
it can't be caused by sheer Hardware
limitations of the human brain
and that's because of the universality
of computation
which ensures that Hardware limitations
can only be essentially
a deficiency of speed or memory
and not limitations on content
in that case we could still understand
all relevant explanations if necessary
with the help of computers or with the
help of ram expansions of the brain and
there's nothing fundamentally new there
um we've been understanding the world
for Centuries with the help of pencil
and paper which is which is logically
the same thing as Einstein remarked
my pencil and I are more clever than I
well another possibility that some
people claim is that we may be
qualitatively unable to understand some
explanations or that the world just
isn't explicable Beyond a certain limit
John haldane famously expressed this
as
the universe is not only queerer than we
suppose but queerer than we can suppose
rather dramatic and
Richard Dawkins even has an evolutionary
argument for that
he said
well his argument goes like this
in our ancestral environment
being able to detect things like the
approach of predators
improved our ancestors chance of
surviving to have Offspring but
evolution did not waste any resources on
detecting giving us the ability to
detect phenomena that were not relevant
to our survival which is why that's
exactly why
we can't for instance see quasars with
the naked eye even though in the cosmic
scheme of this Quasar they're very
important
so Dawkins argues there's no reason to
expect our brains to be any different
from our eyes in this respect they too
evolve to cope with to understand
phenomena on human scales of
size time energy
and also just parochial factors
but most phenomena in the universe
happen far above or below or outside
those scales so just as our senses can't
detect quasars or neutrinos or most
significant phenomena in the cosmic
scheme of things
there's no reason to expect our brains
to understand those things
and it follows then that to the extent
that our brains already do understand
some of those things we must have been
lucky
so the theory goes
and a run of luck can't be expected to
last that long
so same scientific progress can't be
expected to exceed a certain limit
defined by the biology of our brains
and we must expect to reach that limit
sooner rather than later
always the case when
these exponential growth things are
being compared
so beyond that limit the world stops
making sense
or seems to which from Alpine computers
be the same catastrophe
but
if holding were really right that we
live inside a little bubble of
explicability in in a great inexplicable
universe
then
then really it's critical either because
the outside is needed in our explanation
of the inside in fact pauldine's own
argument is an example of that of why we
can allegedly not understand certain
things
so
it implies that even our parochial
experience would only seem explicable
if we carefully refrain from asking
certain questions
now doesn't that bear an uncanny
resemblance to the pre-scientific
intellectual landscape with its
distinction between
the Earth that was built for human
convenience and a heaven that's beyond
human comprehension
so this is trying to take us back to an
archaic
anthropocentric world view
and in fact
any assumption that the world is
inexplicable
just leads to extremely bad explanations
of the easily variable just so story
kind that characterize myths
because by definition if if we're in a
finite bubble of explicability then no
hypothesis about the outside
can be a better explanation than just
the claim that Zeus rules there
and therefore also that he rules here
and so hauldine's theory is nothing
other than than an appeal to the
supernatural
if we wanted to incorporate into our
world view an imaginary Realm of which
we have no evidence and can have no
evidence but we should nevertheless
affects us
then
we need never have bothered to abandon
the the myths of antiquity and we
wouldn't have
okay so the world is explicable we're
making progress now now
so far I've been discussing pure
understanding
which but that mostly affects the world
via technology
and with pure understanding what we've
just established is possible but why is
technological progress possible in
principle we could understand everything
and understand why we're going to be
wiped out but not be able to do anything
what was
what is the necessary connection between
fundamental understanding and
technological progress
well hmm
consider
the set of all conceivable
transformations of physical objects I
mean conceivable not necessarily
possible I mainly have in mind
Transformations for the better but
consider the set of all conceivable
Transformations now some of those are
uh forbidden by the laws of physics like
a faster than light communication
and some like the formation of stars out
of out of hydrogen
happen
spontaneously
and some
and actually this is the vast majority
of transformations
as Exotics such as
um
converting air and water into trees or
converting minerals into radio
telescopes
our possible
that they happen only when the requisite
knowledge is embodied in suitable
physical objects such as genes or brains
and
these are the only possibilities that
that's to say
every
conceivable physical transformation
is either
impossible because of the laws of
physics
or
achievable given the right knowledge
there isn't a third possibility
and that is a momentous dichotomy
which is entailed
entirely by the scientific world view
because
if there were Transformations that
technology could never achieve no matter
how much knowledge was brought to bear
then this would itself be a testable
regularity in nature You can predict
that whenever whenever that
transformation was attempted it would
fail
so that would be
a law of physics which is a
contradiction and it follows that
everything that isn't forbidden by laws
of physics is achievable given the right
knowledge
there are no insuperable obstacles to
transforming nature other than the laws
of physics
and that is almost what I have defined
there as the principle of optimism
namely all Evils are due to life
the only remaining Gap
is the question of
whether any of the prohibitions imposed
by the laws of physics are inherently
evils
for example some people imagine that
death is somehow required by the second
law of thermodynamics
well a non-silly example is is the
argument that the finiteness of the
speed of light must eventually put an
end to uh exponential growth
because
the volume of the sphere that we occupy
can't possibly increase faster than the
cube of the time of the time taken
but that is actually misleading in
several ways
one simple way is that because of time
dilation that speed of light barrier is
never experienced as a barrier by the
fast-moving Observer you could cross the
Galaxy in a day
subjectively if you've moved faster than
that
but more importantly
from the point of view of what I'm
discussing
that argument misconstrues the nature of
exponential growth in regard to
knowledge
basically
knowledge is a replicator it's an
abstract replicator not only does it
reproduce itself
it undergoes variation recombination and
evolution and so the amount of knowledge
that the the in in an environment of
rational thought that that allows it to
grow
gross exponentially
but that's exponentially real relative
to the speed of computation
that's what counts not the speed
relative to proper time or cosmological
time it's
Improvement per computational step or
per unit thought
and
that's what's experienced subjectively
by the creators of knowledge and the
users of knowledge
with suitable technology we could always
adjust that
down to any convenient value if
necessary to make it subjective but it's
still an exponential growth
and in the cosmological long run depends
on what cosmological model is triggered
in the long run that might be what we do
and by the way it's not directly
relevant here but I I thought to this
audience I better mentioned as well that
for the converse reason
it was a mistake to think of the
so-called Singularity as being a shock
where we suddenly find that we can't
cope with life because iPhone updates
are coming every day
or every hour and then every second
and
and that's that's a mistake because
when progress reaches that speed
our technologically enhanced
speed of thinking will have increased in
proportion
and so subjectively again we will
experience mere exponential growth in
the sense that I just defined
which is Pleasant satisfying and never
too much of a good thing
in fact no Evils are known to be built
into normal physics and we shouldn't
expect any to be discovered because
the way the growth of knowledge works
is that
basically
growing creativity is pitted against
fixed obstacles of nature
and that's basically why creativity
always wins eventually you can or can
always
if applied by optimists
if there were an obstacle that could
forever evade creative attack
that would mean because of the
connection between
technology and fundamental understanding
that there was also a bound on
fundamental understanding and as I said
the belief that in such events
especially the beliefs that such abound
will exist without any evidence
is rank superstition
so
given optimism now
how do we plan how do we formulate
policies
for the unknown
and the the basic answer is
analog us to what is already standard
practice within science
which Carl Poppa described very well as
follows just read an Abridged quote
um this question has always been asked
in the spirit of
what are the best sources of knowledge
the most reliable ones the ones which
will not lead us into error I propose to
assume instead that no such ideal
sources exist and that all sources are
liable to lead us into error at times
and I propose to replace therefore
the question of the sources of our
knowledge by the entirely different
question
how can we hope to detect and eliminate
error
in other words he's saying
errors will happen and and try to
increase the our ability to detect it
once it has happened after it has
happened
if you find the same Insight who's
political philosophy with his
realization that
the fundamental traditional question of
political philosophy namely who should
rule
begs for authoritarian and therefore
progress impeding answers under the
rational question is
how can we set up institutions in such a
way that bad rulers and bad policies can
be removed without violence and indeed
as easily as possible
so applying that idea that basic idea to
our question
well those decision theoretic strategies
that I've argued can't work are the same
as those non-existent sources of
reliable knowledge that Papa was
referring to
and and those non-existent reliable ways
of choosing good rulers and good
political policies
consequently
optimism demands
that we not try to extract Prophecies of
everything that could go wrong in order
to forestall it from our existing
scanty and misconception Laden
existing mortgage instead we need
policies and institutions that are
capable of correcting mistakes and
recovering from disasters
when they happen
when not it
so they must among other things
facilitate rapid knowledge creation
including technological knowledge but
also including wealth
Define not as Bank balances but as just
the repertoire of physical
Transformations that we are capable of
causing
in addition to those General aspects of
policy
optimism also has specific implications
I think for every plan for the
unknowable
for for Society for individuals
for instance it tells us that the way to
prevent that nightmare of Rogue of the
Rogue AI apocalypse
is not to try to enslave our ai's
because it's the AIS are creating new
knowledge
and that's the definition of an AI
then successfully enslaving them
would require foretelling prophesying
the ideas that they could have and
indeed the consequences of those ideas
which is impossible
so instead just as for our fellow humans
and for the same reason
we must allow AIS to integrate into the
institutions of our open Society
and for similar reasons
optimism tells us not to be gullible
about
genetic
sociobiological explanations of human
choices even in the past and present but
certainly not for the future
because Justice
human choices can't be predicted when
they involve creating new knowledge
so they can't possibly be encoded in our
DNA pretty incredible
okay so another issue
optimism tells us not to hide from the
extraterrestrials
the idea that there could be beings out
there that are to us as we are to
animals
is again
quite straightforwardly a belief in the
Supernatural it is to forget that there
is only one way of making progress
namely
we've agreed on that
and
the only moral values that permit
sustained progress are the objective
values of
an open society and more broadly of the
Enlightenment
No Doubt
the et's morality would not be the same
as ours but nor will it be the same as
that of the 16th century conquistadors
it will be better than ours
elves is
want Improvement
and no
because of optimism that it is achieved
by knowledge so that any culture shock
or other evils which no doubt will
result from any contact with PTS can be
overcome with even more knowledge
over the centuries
the term optimism has had a wide variety
of meanings
it was originally a philosophical term
like like that but
um
originally referring to that notorious
theory of the leibniz had that we live
in the best of all possible worlds and
that all apparent counter examples to
that are actually necessary for some
greater good which was therefore an
incomprehensible greater good
and therefore that theory
is in my terminology
almost pure pessimism
since then the the word optimism has
come to mean all sorts of other
non-philosophical things such as having
a sunny disposition
which is certainly a lot better than the
library's Theory but optimism in this
sense that I have argued for is not a
Feeling
it's not a bias or spin
that we put on facts like you know half
full instead of half empty
nor on on predictions it's not a hope
for the best nor uh
blind expectation of the best
in some senses quite the contrary we
expect errors
it is a
cold hard
far-reaching implication
of rejecting irrationality nothing else
thank you for listening
thank you
I'm sure there'll be a couple of
questions after that yes hi David
um yeah so I had two questions which one
was a senseful one
and one is a maybe a little bit
facetious
um so what you were saying that there's
no reason we should hide from ET and I
guess you're alluding to perhaps Stephen
Hawkins or people who suggested that
we're all doomed because we're just
going to be annihilated by some far
superior
um race and I like your answer that you
know in order to have become Superior
they have to have faced these kind of uh
what's but what about the Borg okay so I
mean
okay the court for those of you who
aren't Star Trek nuts like me a bit like
a disease so they you know there are a
lot of advanced societies out there but
they they kind of something that's gone
wrong and that can sort of exist and
grow at the expense of things like a
cancer so shouldn't we be worried about
them at least okay so
I'll start with my facetious songs
the facetious answer is
the Borg how fictional
serious
the Bold way of life is a way of life
it doesn't create any knowledge it it
just uh the
um continues to Exist by assimilating
existing knowledge that's actually very
like what the Roman Empire did
it it respected knowledge but it didn't
create knowledge and so so long as it
was expanding and conquering other
cultures and taking the best from them
it could survive when it stopped it
began to Decay and went away so the Borg
way of life is a actually although it
doesn't look like it you know uh like
the Roman Empire didn't look too
vulnerable in the first few hundred
years but but the bored way of life is
actually a fixed way of life
and it's never going to win in the long
run against an exponentially improving
way of life
actually I think that that is even shown
in the Star Trek series
David
a wonderful talk
um I'm just just one particular question
you said that evils aren't built into
the laws of nature but I just wonder how
you can reconcile the principle of
optimism with your uh post effort
quantum mechanics because presumably in
the vast majority of effort advantages
that support life then intelligent uh
beings aren't going to arise that are
capable of getting rid of them well yes
I mean you might as well you might as
well talk about the past or the present
yeah but we haven't cure cancer yet so
in a sense cancer is an evil built into
the laws of physics because it we
couldn't have evolved without some
errors in our design which we eventually
going to correct but that doesn't
contradict this
that evil is due to lack of knowledge
now there are some universes in which
there's a drastic lack of knowledge
because of bad partner whatever and in
those there are more evils than in our
universe there are some universities in
which there's more knowledge and they
have theories but this is the truth
about the Multiverse as a whole it's a
law of nature
yes
does that mean the Future Insurance
won't be necessary
and no because the the kind of Converse
of that is that
um
there will always be errors
and there's no upper limit to the harm
that can be done by an error this is
just see this is this version of
optimism is
not so much uh
uh well it's not for telling anything
it's it's a way of understanding error
it's saying that error isn't insuperable
it's it's not it's not something that
had to be that way it's it has to be
that way rather it's something that
knowledge can overcome
so yes there will be and always be
Insurance Company
now I guess once once we're all once we
all have lots of backups then insurance
would be that important
you could ensure the backups yeah
once you have
10 to the 20.
you also seem to me to imply that the
likelihood of error
stays constant over time
stand right
um
I don't think so well first of all I
certainly wouldn't put it in terms of
likelihood because likelihood is
illegitimate when discussing the future
of knowledge the probabilities but I
think not because I think uh
as I just said
um we're fallible and not only are
mistakes always going to be made but
there's no upper bound on the size of
mistakes that are going to be made any
more than there's an upper bound on the
amount of knowledge that can be created
there are no infallible sources of
knowledge if we knew that there's an
upper bound long number of mistakes that
could be made then once we had reached
that limit like in any particular year
we'd know that we've been fallible for
the rest of the year so there can't be
such an upper bound on the size of the
mistakes so we we could be destroyed
altogether
and still be compatible with that
I have one question
um it seems like we still need to make
some kind of forecast in a quantitative
way about a future in order to decide
how to act you want against
um making probability estimates about
knowledge that we don't have
um but supposing you were in malthus's
position the same with the contents of
the talk but otherwise only malthus's
knowledge he had to make some kind of
recommendation to government
um or some some kind of decision how
would you act okay well there are two
things
not everything is is is affected by this
blindness
it's only the things that are going to
be affected by knowledge
so
um you know we can we can only
assumption let's say that that we're not
somebody isn't going to work out a way
of switching off the Sun and isn't going
to use that method in the next year we
can use ordinary astronomy to predict
what the sun will do
and similarly and some things you know
are half and half like I said the growth
of population doesn't require all that
much knowledge because the knowledge to
create more people and is going to
remain the same throughout the 19th it's
interesting and so that could be not you
know we can't we we can always make
mistakes even with scientific prediction
that that's but what I would what I
would advise then and now
is that
um policy
should be to
create knowledge that is Broad and deep
so that it has a chance of coping with
unknown and sometimes unknowable
that challenges so go up a broad and
deep knowledge and before that you know
at the beginning of the 19th century
there was just the basic thing of
improved the open Society structures so
that we can indeed correct errors and
that aren't like Aristocrats who can
arbitrarily do stuff
thank you yes
um
I like the ideas very much it's what
worries me is that uh fear uh which is
the uh the opposite of of optimism and
stops people thinking uh and we can get
metastable states of of opinion and so
on like we have on the subject of
nuclear radiation and so on where people
think they understand and they don't and
uh we the lack of knowledge is very
serious and is going to affect us very
badly what we need is knowledge and
optimism at the time that you and so
there are quite a lot of things that
where we need to unwind and re-educate
ourselves because we've been making
mistakes in the past I couldn't agree
more and and one kind of knowledge that
we need is knowledge of how to
um
how to prevent this you had a nice
phrase for it
bubble of of of of fear of fear I mean
fear is is uh everywhere and
um yes so I agree
foreign
do you think there is a limit to the
knowledge that the brain can understand
the human brain I mean
um well obviously the brain has a finite
information carrying capacity
but that can be enhanced by technology
and as I mentioned we already are
enhancing by technology routinely all
the time
um and I also argued that that there
can't be a fundamental limit to what we
can understand because of the
combination of the universality of
computation and the argument that
assuming that there are incomprehensible
things is tense amount to a belief in
the Supernatural so in short no